Clarify different federated schema types (#917)
apollographql/federation: docs/source/index.mdx

---

import FederationArchitecture from '../shared/diagrams/federation-architecture.mdx';
import {
  ExpansionPanel,
} from 'gatsby-theme-apollo-docs/src/components/expansion-panel';

To get the most out of GraphQL, your organization should expose a [single data graph](https://principledgraphql.com/integrity#1-one-graph) that provides a unified interface for querying any combination of your backing data sources. However, it can be challenging to represent an enterprise-scale data graph with a single, monolithic GraphQL server.

> To remedy this, you can divide your graph's implementation across multiple back-end services with **Apollo Federation**:

Reviewer: Possibly? I think what you have is also good, just proposing another option. Subgraph might be unintroduced jargon just yet.

```suggestion
To remedy this, you can divide your graph's implementation across multiple subgraphs with **Apollo Federation**:
```

Reviewer: The "possibly?" is commentary directed at my own suggestion, btw.

Author: It is just barely unintroduced, but I will fix by introducing just-in-time 😄

The result is the best of both worlds: an implementation that keeps all the code for a given feature in a single subgraph and separated from unrelated concerns, and a product-centric schema with rich types that reflects the natural way an application developer would want to consume the graph.

## Federated schemas

A federated graph uses multiple "types" of GraphQL schemas:

> * **Subgraph schemas.** Each of your **subgraphs** has its own schema that represents the types and fields of your **supergraph** that it's responsible for resolving.

Reviewer: I think this needs just a just a bit more clarity. Might even add one more statement that says collectively, the subgraphs must be capable of resolving the entire supergraph.

Edit: the addition I'm proposing _is_ mentioned immediately below, so maybe disregard.

```suggestion
* **Subgraph schemas.** Each of your **subgraphs** has its own schema that represents some of the types and fields of your **supergraph** that it's responsible for resolving.
```

extend type User @key(fields: "id") {
  id: ID! @external

>   username: String! @external

Reviewer: This is inappropriately marked as external. Only fields that are referenced by a key, requires, or provides should be marked external.
https://github.com/apollographql/federation/blob/c3bd6ddca9ed148c71eddb7969a5030148f3b582/docs/source/errors.md#L35

Author: Ah, so, `username` _is_ used in a `@provides`, but up in the `Review` type just above here. If I try to compose these exact subgraphs w/ Rover and _don't_ include `username` here with `@external`, I get a composition error.

Reviewer: Ohhh, then great catch! At the glance I took, I wasn't even aware of the review type / that the SDL was collapsed 👍

  body: String
  product: Product
}

type User
  @join__owner(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  @join__type(graph: ACCOUNTS, key: "id")
  @join__type(graph: REVIEWS, key: "id")
{
  id: ID! @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  reviews: [Review] @join__field(graph: REVIEWS)
  username: String! @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
}
```

</ExpansionPanel>

As you can see, the supergraph schema includes a lot of federation-specific additions! These additions are used only by the gateway, and you'll never need to add them manually.

### API schema

The gateway uses its [supergraph schema](#supergraph-schema) to produce an _API schema_, which is what's exposed to clients as your actual GraphQL API. This schema cleanly and logically represents the combination of your [subgraph schemas](#subgraph-schemas):

<ExpansionPanel title="Click to expand">

```graphql
type Product {
  name: String!
  price: Int
  reviews: [Review]
  upc: String!
}

type Query {
  me: User
  topProducts(first: Int = 5): [Product]
}

type Review {
  author: User
  body: String
  product: Product
}

type User {
  id: ID!
  reviews: [Review]
  username: String!
}
```

</ExpansionPanel>

## Gateway example

> The gateway for a federated data graph provides its composed [supergraph schema](#supergraph-schema) to the `ApolloGateway` constructor:

Reviewer: Reads a little funny, and I'm not sure what actually goes in \<here\>
>"The \<gateway\>...provides its supergraph schema to the `ApolloGateway` constructor"

"The {node|server} process", possibly?

```js{4}

> const supergraphSchema = readFileSync('./supergraph.graphql').toString();

Reviewer: Nit: rename this variable to `supergraphSdl` and shorthand it below. In code, `sdl` and `schema` do have somewhat distinct meanings, and this is definitely sdl.
